JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Twenty-three of the 28 member
nations are
still not paying what they
should be paying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
abroad, today
in Brussels, reprimands fellow
NATO leaders
over unpaid dues, but is silent
on NATO's
joint defense pact.
Then: the Manchester attack.
Britain remains on high alert,
as U.S. intelligence-sharing
in the investigation was
temporarily halted,
a casualty of media leaks.
And gender on the job.
Is testosterone an indicator of
who takes
risk at work?
JENNIFER LERNER, Harvard
University: There's
a systematic relationship there.
And it's all explained through
testosterone
as a kind of social dominance
hormone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A note of some
discord today,
as President Trump addressed his
first meeting
of NATO leaders.
He criticized the allies, again,
for falling
short on their share of defense
spending.
From Brussels, special
correspondent Ryan
Chilcote begins our coverage.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Jets blazed over
Brussels and
NATO's gleaming new headquarters
this afternoon,
the flags of all 28 member
states making a
show of unity.
But a short time earlier, with
his fellow
leaders looking on, President
Trump renewed
his longstanding demand: NATO
allies must
do more.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Member nations are still not
paying what they
should be paying and what they
are supposed
to be paying for their defense.
This is not fair to the people
and taxpayers
of the United States.
And many of these nations owe
massive amounts
of money from past years.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The president
noted the bloc
did, however, shell out for a
new home.
DONALD TRUMP: I never asked once
what the
new NATO headquarters cost.
I refuse to do that.
But it is beautiful.
RYAN CHILCOTE: German Chancellor
Angela Merkel,
speaking before the president,
struck a different
note in unveiling a memorial to
the Berlin
Wall.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): Our alliance is
united in the
awareness of the importance of
cooperation
to insist on freedom.
It is not isolation and the
building of walls
that make us successful, but
open societies
that share the same values.
RYAN CHILCOTE: NATO's
secretary-general said
the unveilings of the wall and
wreckage from
the World Trade Center in New
York signify
the importance of the alliance.
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General:
We saw the strength of that bond
after the
9/11 attacks, and for the first
time, NATO
invoked our collective defense
clause, Article
V, one for all and all for one.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Mr. Trump didn't
explicitly
endorse Article V, the first
president who
hasn't since the alliance's
founding in 1949.
After calling NATO obsolete last
year, a comment
he's since walked back, NATO
leaders seemed
dismayed.
President Trump did, though,
appear to push
the prime minister of Montenegro
aside as
leaders moved through a hall,
all of this
in a city that candidate Trump
called a hellhole
last year.
President Trump has also
criticized the European
Union, the other big institution
headquartered
in Brussels, applauding
Britain's decision
to exit the bloc.
The E.U.'s two leaders who share
the job of
running the bloc of 28
countries, the president
of the European commission,
Jean-Claude Juncker,
and the president of the
European Council,
Donald Tusk, also met President
Trump today.
After the meeting, it was clear
that differences
remained.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: Some
issues remain open, like climate
and trade.
And I am not 100 percent sure
that we can
say today -- we means Mr.
President and myself
-- that we have a common
position, common
opinion about Russia.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The new American
president
also held his first meeting with
France's
newly elected president,
Emmanuel Macron.
The handshake lasted six
seconds, and the
39-year-old Frenchman held his
own.
In private, the president of
France urged
Mr. Trump to respect the Paris
climate agreement.
Finally, after a long day in
Brussels, the
president flew on to Sicily for
the G7 summit
tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a short time
ago, I spoke
with Ryan Chilcote from
Brussels.
Ryan, welcome.
So, how did the European leaders
react to
President Trump's criticisms
today?
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, they have
been very reserved,
very guarded in their response
to President
Trump's criticism today.
Don't forget that a good number
of the leaders,
in fact, those that President
Trump, I think,
has been hardest on when it
comes to their
commitments to NATO, are going
to see him
in Sicily tomorrow, so they
don't want a spat
with President Trump.
But, you know, they will clearly
be very disappointed
by the criticism today.
A lot of them feel that the
place where President
Trump delivered his criticism
was the wrong
place to do it, beside this
memorial that
effectively wasn't just to U.S.
troops, but
also to NATO troops who have
lost their lives
in Afghanistan fighting
alongside the United
States after NATO invoked
Article V.
So they don't like where the
comments were
made.
And then the other issue, of
course, is that
many of them disagree that
they're not doing
enough or moving in the right
direction to
support NATO in terms of their
military spending.
The president pointed out that
23 out of the
28 NATO members are not spending
2 percent
of their budgets on the military
at this point
-- of their GDP.
And they will say that, in fact,
if you look
at the commitment, they have
until 2024 to
do that.
And here at NATO, from the NATO
officials
I have talked to, they believe
that the vast
majority of the NATO countries
are well on
their way with verifiable plans
to do that,
with the notable exception of
Germany.
But they weren't showing that
because they
want to work with President
Trump, and they
clearly believe -- and that was
very apparent
in the language, the body
language today -- that
this is a president that they
need to win
over.
They need to assure him that
NATO is something
that's in the United States'
interest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
Ryan, you were
just in Russia.
You covered the Kremlin for,
what, 20 years.
What do you think Russia, the
Russian officials
are thinking about today's
meeting?
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, I wouldn't
say that they
would be delighted with today's
meeting, because,
of course, they're never
delighted by anything
that NATO does.
They see NATO as a threat to
Russia.
But they will be happier about
this meeting
than they were about the meeting
that we saw
last year or the year before.
Remember, it was at those
meetings that NATO
took a very hard line on Russia
in the aftermath
of Russia's intervention in
Ukraine.
It was those meetings that led
to the deployment
of about 3,000 NATO troops,
troops under NATO's
command right really at Russia's
border in
the Baltic countries and in
Poland.
And the fact that we didn't get
that explicit
expression of support from
Article V from
President Trump today, these are
the things
that the Russians will be very
pleased about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, any
sense of
what the Trump administration,
the Trump delegation
thinks about all this?
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, they said
that the meeting
was a success.
Sean Spicer spoke with reporters
after.
And he said that, you know, the
president's
hard line, if you will, the
criticism that
he has been consistent with for
the last year-and-a-half,
is really paying dividends.
He said that the meeting, the
dinner meeting,
tonight started with a
discussion about how
the countries can share more of
the burden,
how they can participate in
counterterrorism
along with the United States.
Those have been two key demands
from President
Trump.
And really, Sean Spicer, for
one, played down
the idea that President Trump
should have
explicitly supported or endorsed
Article V,
you know, saying, look, he was
there to dedicate
-- to read the dedication, to
give a speech
at a memorial that is called
Article V and
9/11.
So, of course, the president
even by just
being here at the NATO meeting
supports Article
V.
So, he has pushed back on all
that.
They see the president's tough
line here at
NATO and in Europe in general as
the right
approach, the only way that's
going to get
the goods that they want
delivered.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ryan Chilcote,
covering today's
NATO meeting in Brussels, thank
you.
In the day's other news: A
federal appeals
court in Richmond, Virginia,
upheld a lower
court ruling that blocked
President Trump's
revised travel ban.
The appellate judges of the
Fourth Circuit
said the policy, targeting six
mostly Muslim
nations -- quote -- "drips with
religious
intolerance."
It's the first appeals court to
rule on the
revised ban.
The Justice Department says that
it will appeal
to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Pentagon has concluded that
a U.S. airstrike
in Iraq last March led to the
death of at
least 105 civilians.
It happened in Mosul, where
government forces
are fighting to retake the city
from the Islamic
State group.
Investigators say they found
that a U.S. bomb
dropped on a building set off
explosives that
ISIS fighters had planted
inside.
The airstrike was originally
intended to kill
two snipers.
China's government is protesting
after a U.S.
warship sailed close to manmade
islands in
the South China Sea today.
The guided missile destroyer
Dewey came within
12 nautical miles of Mischief
Reef, which
the Chinese now claim.
In Beijing, a Foreign Ministry
spokesman said
the U.S. challenge hurts efforts
to resolve
disputes.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): The U.S.'
actions bring
severe disruptions to the
process of negotiations,
and can only bring harm and not
benefits.
China's resolve to protect its
sovereign territory,
security and maritime interests
is resolute.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. disputes
China's claim
and says that it will continue
to conduct
freedom of navigation exercises
in the area.
This was the first one since
President Trump
took office.
Government troops in the
Philippines launched
a new operation today to retake
control of
a southern city from Islamist
militants.
Soldiers arrived in Marawi
backed by tanks
and attack helicopters.
The rebels have sealed off much
of the city,
and thousands of people have
fled.
In Brazil, President Michel
Temer has canceled
a decree that deployed the
military last night,
after violent protests.
An estimated 45,000 people
marched in the
capital, Brasilia, demanding
that Temer resign
over corruption allegations.
Police fired tear gas and pepper
spray when
some protesters set fires and
vandalized government
buildings.
MAN (through translator): It
doesn't represent
the people.
It is a movement created by
unions, because
to protest is correct, but
vandalism is totally
wrong.
What they did is an example of
savagery.
MAN (through translator): I
approve demonstrations,
but I thought it was absurd on
both sides.
Military police also made a
serious mistake
in targeting demonstrators.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Temer initially
said he called
out troops in a bid to restore
order.
He retreated after widespread
criticism that
it was a power grab.
The FBI has declined, for now,
to hand over
to Congress documents on former
Director James
Comey's communications with the
president.
The House Oversight Committee
wanted the material.
Meanwhile, former U.S. Senator
Joe Lieberman
withdrew from consideration to
be the next
FBI director.
He cited a potential conflict of
interests,
now that one of his law partners
is representing
the president in the probe of
ties between
his campaign and the Russians.
OPEC today extended an agreement
to cut output
for another nine months in an
effort to shore
up prices.
The agreement includes the 14
members of the
oil cartel, plus 10 other
nations.
Despite the deal, oil prices
fell today back
under $50 a barrel.
And long-term U.S. mortgage
rates fell this
week, to the lowest levels of
the year.
Mortgage buyer Freddie Mac said
that the benchmark
30-year-rate dipped below 4
percent.
And Wall Street scored new
gains, as big retailers
reported strong earnings.
The Dow Jones industrial average
was up 70
points to close near 21083.
The Nasdaq rose 42, and the S&P
500 added
10, both of those indexes
closing at record
highs.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Manchester
attack leaks from the
investigation temporarily
pause intelligence-sharing; fear
of Russia
-- Sweden invests in its
military as a precaution
against neighboring Russia; and
much more.
It's been a day for mourning in
Manchester,
England, and for new police
raids in the concert
bombing that killed 22 people.
Police say they have very
important clues
to what drove Salman Abedi and
10 other suspects
to potential -- and to other
suspects.
Ciaran Jenkins of Independent
Television News
has our report.
CIARAN JENKINS: At 11:00 a.m. in
the spring
sunshine, Manchester fell
silent, united in
grief.
For a moment, remembrance
outshone the darkness
of terror.
This was for the dead, the
injured, their
families and friends.
At dawn, another raid a mile
from the Didsbury
Mosque, where Salman Abedi
worshiped.
They're closing in on his
movements.
On the night of the attack, he
was in this
rented property police raided
yesterday.
Police say they have made
significant arrests,
eight in total.
This man was apprehended
yesterday in Wigan.
A property there is being
searched tonight,
as well as two other properties
in Manchester.
But investigators face an
unwelcomed obstacle.
The New York Times published
photos of bomb
components from the scene of the
blast, the
latest leak from U.S.
intelligence.
IAN HOPKINS, Greater Manchester
Chief Constable:
Last night, the family liaison
officer shared
with those families the fact
that intelligence
had been leaked and published in
The New York
Times.
It is absolutely understandable
the distress
and upset that this caused to
those families,
who are already suffering, as
everyone can
imagine.
CIARAN JENKINS: The queen today
saw for herself
the children Salman Abedi deemed
terror targets.
QUEEN ELIZABETH II, United
Kingdom: And you
had enjoyed the concert?
GIRL: Yes, it was really good.
CIARAN JENKINS: She spoke with
15-year-old
Millie.
And to 14-year-old Evie, she
made her own
disgust with the attacker known.
QUEEN ELIZABETH II: Very wicked.
CIARAN JENKINS: But the terror
network who
did this is still being hunted.
The threat level remains at its
highest.
And major English hospitals have
been told
to prepare for similar attacks.
As of this afternoon, you will
see armed police
on trains nationwide for the
first time.
Britain remains under imminent
threat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we
examine the diplomatic
fight that's broken out over the
leaked photos
of the bomb detonated in
Manchester.
William Brangham takes it from
here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: U.K. officials
are so incensed
over those photos being shared
that the police
stopped sharing information with
the U.S.
for a time today.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister
Theresa May met
with President Trump at the NATO
summit in
Brussels.
Going in, she said she wants to
maintain the
special security partnership
with the U.S.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: That
partnership is built on trust.
And part of that trust is
knowing that intelligence
can be shared confidently.
And I will be making clear to
President Trump
today that intelligence shared
between law
enforcement agencies must remain
secure.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president,
in turn,
issued his own statement
condemning the leaks.
He asked the Justice Department
and other
agencies to launch a -- quote --
"complete
investigation."
For more on this, and the
broader investigation
into the bombing, I'm joined now
by Ali Soufan.
He's a former FBI special agent
who handled
several major terrorism
investigations, including
the 2001 al-Qaida bombing of the
USS Cole
in Yemen.
He now runs a consulting group
and is author
of the book "Anatomy of Terror."
Welcome back to the "NewsHour."
ALI SOUFAN, Former FBI
Interrogator: Thank
you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: From an
investigator's point
of view, help me understand why
the British
would be so angry about these
photos of these
bomb-making parts, why those
being out there
would bother them so much.
ALI SOUFAN: Well, they have an
ongoing investigation.
And this investigation is way
more than an
act that already happened.
There is an imminent threat
that's unfolding
in the U.K.
You want to protect your
investigative leads,
number one.
You need to protect the
integrity of your
evidence and of your
investigation.
And when you're trying to catch
terrorists
who are still on the loose, you
know, you
don't want them to know what you
know.
So, as an investigator, you know
-- and it
happened to me personally -- you
get so frustrated
when you see sometimes,
intentionally or
unintentionally,
people hindering your
investigation.
So I don't blame the
investigators on the
ground to be really upset about
leaks, about
any investigative leaks that
have been published
either in papers or broadcast on
television.
I am just not sure they can put
all the blame
on the United States.
I think that's very unfair.
And I think, even in the
pictures in The New
York Times, I believe, in The
New York Times'
story, they said that they got
access to them
from British law enforcement
sources.
I think leaks are really bad in
this situation.
It's not only reckless.
It's dangerous when you have
terrorists still
on the loose.
But to blame everything on the
people here
in the United States, I think
it's not fair.
I think they need to do a
further investigation
to know who's leaking what to
whom.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just so I'm
clear on this,
the concern would be that let's
just say the
suspects in this case were to
see those photographs.
They would somehow know exactly
what amount
of evidence the police had in
their custody,
and that might then lead them to
think, oh,
they're much closer to getting
me than I thought.
ALI SOUFAN: Well, first of all,
I think the
British were really upset about
leaking the
name of the suicide bomber.
Maybe, as an investigator, I
don't want the
name to be out, I want them to
know that -- I
want them to think that I'm
still in the dark,
so I can have the advantage in
identifying
his friends, his support
network, people who
probably are working with him or
supported
him or aid him.
You know, so I wanted to have
the upper hand
in these kind of things.
As for other evidence that's
collected from
the scene, they will be
watching, and they
will be hearing our analysis of
it.
And maybe they will even know
how to do it
better.
I remember, in some of the
stories, there
was some analytical pieces about
what's wrong
with the device, what's wrong
with the detonator.
We have to be very careful,
especially when
you have an ongoing
investigation unfolding,
so dangerous to our partners in
the U.K.,
that they raised the threat
level in the country
to critical, which is the third
time they
did that in, like, 10 years.
So we have to be very careful,
and we have
to respect the circumstances on
the ground,
help them protect the integrity
of their investigation,
but also aid them to arrest and
apprehend
anyone who might be involved in
the attack
in Manchester or probably
another imminent
attack that might be taking
place.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ISIS, as you
know, took
credit for this.
And some have theorized that
ISIS will encourage
more and more attacks like this
as they lose
more and more territory and
fighters in Syria
and Iraq.
Do you believe that assessment?
Do you think that this is a sign
of ISIS'
strength or is this a sign of
its weakness?
ALI SOUFAN: Well, it's
definitely a sign of
both.
I mean, you know, ISIS is losing
territory
in Syria and Iraq.
ISIS is losing the so-called
caliphate.
They always bragged it's
(INAUDIBLE) which
means remaining and expanding.
Now it's definitely not
remaining and absolutely
not expanding.
So they are trying to inspire
people to do
terrorist attacks around the
world.
And we have seen that in the
United States.
We have seen that in Europe.
Now, what level of support, what
level of
coordination and direction ISIS
had with this
Manchester bombing yet to be
seen.
There are a lot of unknowns in
this.
But, for example, as we have
seen in the United
States, ISIS claimed
responsibility for attacks
that they had nothing to do with
whatsoever,
just because they believed they
might inspire
that attack.
So now we're seeing -- with
these kind of
attacks, we're seeing the
boundaries, organizational
boundaries, becoming more and
more blurry,
and the threat is a message.
And that message is the same.
Remember, ISIS used to be a
branch of al-Qaida.
ISIS came out of al-Qaida.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
ALI SOUFAN: So, ideologically
speaking, they
are the same.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Ali
Soufan, thank
you very much.
ALI SOUFAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
stop the presses
-- does an assault by a
candidate represent
changed attitudes toward the
media?; gender
on the job -- is testosterone an
indicator
of who takes risk at work?; and
a Brief But
Spectacular take on artificial
intelligence.
But first: As we reported
earlier, President
Trump was at NATO headquarters
today in Brussels.
The decades-old NATO alliance
has found new
meaning of late.
The main cause?
Russian muscle-flexing in Europe
and beyond.
Several European nations are not
members of
the alliance, including Sweden.
And now Swedes are enlarging
their military
in new ways, preparing for an
old threat.
From the Swedish island of
Gotland in the
Baltic Sea, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Twelve years
after Sweden
deemed post-Soviet Russia to be
weak and demilitarized
Gotland, the army is back.
Times have changed.
Gotland is no longer immune from
danger.
A 300-strong battle group,
including a part-time
tank company, will be in place
by July.
Until then, the island has
become a stage
for war games, sending a
deterrent message
to the Kremlin.
Sergeant Major Henrik Wulff:
SGT.
MAJ.
HENRIK WULFF, Swedish Army
(through translator):
Now, this is part of their basic
military
training, training as squads and
platoons.
But, of course, Gotland is
Swedish, and we
will protect Gotland to any
means necessary.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The recruits
are learning
to protect themselves from a
surprise attack.
For a country that epitomizes
peace, that's
a difficult scenario to grasp.
Sweden has not fought a war
since 1814.
It has nurtured its neutrality
for over 200
years.
During the Cold War, it was
neutral because
it was suspicious of both the
superpowers.
But now Russian muscle-flexing
is jangling
Swedish nerves.
The government is promising to
increase defense
spending by 11 percent over the
next five
years and it is to reintroduce
conscription.
Gotland is a popular Nordic
tourist destination.
It's main town, Visby, the
best-preserved
fortified commercial city in
Northern Europe,
is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The island, a three-hour ferry
ride from the
Swedish mainland, is vulnerable
because of
its strategic location, close to
Latvia and
the Russian enclave of
Kaliningrad, where
a quarter of a million military
personnel
are based.
Colonel Matthias Ardin.
COL.
MATTHIAS ARDIN, Swedish
Military: Gotland
is an area in the middle of the
Baltic Sea.
From this island, it is possible
to influence
both air and sea ways within the
area.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Colonel Ardin
commands Swedish
forces on Gotland.
COL.
MATTHIAS ARDIN: Russia is
putting a lot of
money into their military force.
We have a deteriorating security
situation
within the Baltics.
We are trying to enhance our
military capabilities.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But do you
think Russia is
going to look at some of these
exercises and
just laugh because you are
hopelessly outnumbered?
COL.
MATTHIAS ARDIN: I think Russia
follows the
developments in the Baltic
region like every
other nation does.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Last week, the
Swedish defense
minister, Peter Hultqvist, was
at the Pentagon,
raising concerns with Defense
Secretary James
Mattis.
PETER HULTQVIST, Swedish Defense
Minister:
From my perspective, Russia is
the main challenge.
Russia challenged the European
security order.
This has a destabilizing impact
on Northern
Europe and beyond.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Four years ago,
Russia simulated
a nuclear attack against Sweden
as part of
a military exercise.
Its submarines and agents have
also reportedly
been probing Swedish defenses.
But political scientist Mi
Lennhag, a former
Foreign Ministry Russia
specialist, believes
the Kremlin is bluffing.
MI LENNHAG, Political Scientist:
I think that
Putin and Kremlin, Russia, want
a bipolar
world again, where Putin is a
greater man
than Trump, and especially to
destabilize
Europe, to make sure that Europe
and Sweden
in this case and the Baltics
actually know
that Russia is strong and
powerful -- and
it is -- and that the major goal
is to make
people aware of it, not to
really act on it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Russia's
psychological offensive
has forced Sweden to address
defense personnel
shortages caused by young
people's reluctance
to sign up after the draft was
abolished in
2010.
The government is introducing a
form of targeted
conscription that will compel
4,000 18-year-olds
to undergo military training
every year.
SGT.
MAJ.
HENRIK WULFF: Our professional
soldiers are
very, very good.
But quantity is also a quality.
And we need more troops in
Sweden.
And the conscript system is an
excellent way
for that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: High school
student Albin
Gahm is one of 100,000 eligible
Swedes who'll
be subjected to what is
effectively a draft
lottery.
ALBIN GAHM, Student: Many of us
don't want
to fight.
I don't want to fight either,
but I know,
if I have to, I will do it.
But it's really divided.
STUDENT: I prefer to spend my
life as I want
to and die when I want to,
instead of having
the chance of ending when I
don't want to.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This air vent
represents
another impact of the Russian
threat.
It's happening underneath places
like this
government-subsidized housing
project on the
outskirts of Gotland's main
town.
Garage 71 has a dual purpose.
Behind its heavy metal gate,
it's not only
a repository for old cars, but
also one of
60,000 shelters built during the
Cold War,
when Sweden feared being caught
in the crossfire
of a nuclear conflagration.
They were mothballed after the
collapse of
the Soviet Union, but, as a
result of the
current tensions, the Swedish
Contingency
Agency has ordered that the 350
bunkers on
Gotland be restocked and
prepared.
This shelter is designed to
protect about
200 people.
We are about 10 feet
underground.
And this reinforced concrete is
supposed to
be able to take a direct hit in
a conventional
war.
In another part of the island at
a Cold War
military bunker, now a museum,
custodian Kjell
Pettersson laments the return of
historical
tensions.
KJELL PETTERSSON, Custodian
(through translator):
I really hope that a conflict
won't happen.
But in today's world, where so
much is happening
in the world around us, you just
don't know.
So, I am a bit worried.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The medieval
walls that ring
Visby were useless in 1808, when
a Russian
force temporarily took control
of Gotland,
before being expelled by the
Swedes.
In such tranquil surroundings,
it's hard for
some residents to comprehend
that this is
once again a potential front
line.
MARIA JAMES, Planning Official:
I would say,
as a Swede, we're still in the
mind-set that
we're a neutral country and war
cannot happen
to us.
But I guess we have to
reevaluate this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Maria James is
a planning
official with the local
government.
She's married to David James, an
American
security expert who hails from
Virginia.
MARIA JAMES: If they want, they
can take Gotland
in a matter of days, I guess, or
hours even.
So I would probably more
inclined just to
roll over, because I don't want
any casualties.
And I don't want them to use
force.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The family is
standing besides
a component of Gotland's
defenses.
This unprepossessing garage also
contains
a bomb shelter.
DAVID JAMES, Resident of
Gotland: I'm not
at all positive about the
future, because,
I mean, how can you be positive
with Trump
as president?
He's something of a wild card.
And the combination of Trump and
Putin and
North Korea and others, it just
really makes
things seem like, well, anything
could happen
really.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Russia's
aggression is creating
a dilemma for the Swedes.
They're being pushed ever closer
to NATO,
but are resisting membership, an
act that
President Putin would regard as
hostile.
Gotland's deputy mayor, Meit
Fohlin, reflects
the view of the governing Social
Democratic
Party.
MEIT FOHLIN, Gotland Deputy
Mayor: It is better
to be free and to have our
cooperations where
we want them to be.
I think that neutrality has
served us well
up to this day, and I think it
is the right
way even in the future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Later this
summer, these
training exercises will be
supplanted by a
much bigger war game involving
20,000 Swedish
troops, as well as 1,000 U.S.
personnel.
Despite Sweden's fears, it's not
about to
join NATO, but Defense Secretary
Mattis gave
this pledge:
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of
Defense: America
will not abandon democratic
allies and partners.
And we will stand with Sweden,
and all democracies
will stand together.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The country's
best defense
may ultimately be the neutrality
upon which
it's relied.
But being neutral doesn't mean
not being ready.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Gotland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today's closely
watched special
election for Montana's lone seat
in the U.S.
House of Representatives took a
bizarre turn
last night when the Republican
candidate was
charged with assaulting a news
reporter.
The altercation, and other less
extreme incidents
involving journalists, raise
questions about
how attitudes toward the news
media may be
changing.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: The race between
Democrat Rob Quist
and Republican Greg Gianforte
was upended
in its closing hours when
Guardian reporter
Ben Jacobs tried to ask the
Republican about
the health care bill.
Jacobs was recording the
conversation.
GREG GIANFORTE (R), Montana
Congressional
Candidate: Yes, we'll talk to
you about that
later.
BEN JACOBS, The Guardian: Yes,
but there's
not going to be time.
I'm just curious...
GREG GIANFORTE: OK, speak with
Shane, please.
I'm sick and tired of you guys!
BEN JACOBS: Jesus Christ!
GREG GIANFORTE: The last guy you
came in here,
you did the same thing!
Get the hell out of here!
BEN JACOBS: Jesus!
GREG GIANFORTE: Get the hell out
of here!
The last guy did the same thing!
You with The Guardian?
BEN JACOBS: Yes!
And you just broke my glasses.
GREG GIANFORTE: The last guy did
the same
damn thing.
BEN JACOBS: You just
body-slammed me and broke
my glasses.
GREG GIANFORTE: Get the hell out
of here.
JOHN YANG: Gianforte's press
secretary said,
"Aggressive behavior from a
liberal journalist
created this scene."
But a FOX News team witnessed
the confrontation.
ALICIA ACUNA, FOX News:
Gianforte grabbed
him by the neck, both hands,
slid him to the
side, body-slammed him, and then
got on top
of him and started punching, and
then yelling
at him.
JOHN YANG: Late last night, the
sheriff charged
Gianforte with misdemeanor
assault.
This morning, House Speaker Paul
Ryan said
he was out of line.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: There
is no time where a physical
altercation should
occur with the press or with --
just between
human beings.
So, that is wrong and should no
have happened.
Should the gentleman apologize?
Yes, I think he should
apologize.
JOHN YANG: House Minority Leader
Nancy Pelosi
compared Gianforte to President
Trump.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
To see this person who wants to
be the one
representative into the House of
Representatives
from Montana be sort of a
wannabe Trump, it's
a tactic to attack the press.
And we really have to say, this
is about the
Constitution of the United
States.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump, as
candidate and as
president, has targeted media
with harsh language
of his own.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The dishonest media, among the
world's most
dishonest people.
(BOOING)
JOHN YANG: There have been other
incidents
involving public officials and
reporters.
A West Virginia public radio
reporter was
arrested trying to question
Health and Human
Services Secretary Tom Price.
And a Congressional Quarterly
reporter was
allegedly manhandled by security
guards when
he tried to ask a question after
an FCC hearing.
To explore the meaning of these
incidents,
we're joined by Howard Kurtz,
host of "Media
Buzz" on FOX News Channel, and
Tom Rosenstiel,
head of the American Press
Institute and a
senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution.
Howie, Tom, thanks for being
here.
Tom, let me start with you.
Is there a change in the
climate, a change
in attitudes toward the press?
TOM ROSENSTIEL, Executive
Director, American
Press Institute: Yes.
I mean, we're seeing rhetoric,
we're hearing
rhetoric from the White House
that is of a
nature that we really haven't
seen since President
Nixon and the Watergate era, a
demonization
of the press.
It's qualitatively different
than simply accusing
the press of liberal bias or
unfairness.
I mean, to say that they are the
enemy of
the people, among the worst
human beings on
earth, it encourages and
legitimizes an anger
towards the press that, you
know, I think,
fosters this attitude.
Now, there are other elements
that foster
it as well.
The Internet creates an
environment where
there is less civility and
decorum.
And the economics of the country
and the uneasiness
about the country put people on
edge.
But, yes, there is a climate
that's different,
and that I think it's fair to
say the administration
has contributed to it.
JOHN YANG: Howie, a different
climate, with
the administration contributing
to it, what
do you think?
HOWARD KURTZ, FOX News: Well,
there's no question
that President Trump has
escalated his rhetoric
to a degree we have never seen
against the
press.
But I think it is a real
mistake, and we have
to be awfully careful here, to
conflate what
he says, using words, attacking
the press,
which a lot of his base likes,
and, in some
cases, the press deserves -- and
we can get
into that in a moment -- and,
you know, this
congressional candidate in
Montana doing something
that's completely unacceptable
and, by the
way, politically stupid on the
eve of the
election, to physically assault
a reporter
who maybe stuck a type of tape
recorder in
his face.
And I think -- I used to say
this during the
Obama administration when a
police officer
would be shot and some on the
right would
say, well, it's President
Obama's fault because
of the way he talks about the
police.
This kind of guilt by
association, I think
we have to be awfully careful
about.
JOHN YANG: Tom, what about that,
that you
heard in the tape spot Nancy
Pelosi comparing
this candidate to President
Trump?
Howie says that the rhetoric
really doesn't
-- he can't directly relate the
rhetoric to
the actions.
What do you think?
TOM ROSENSTIEL: Well, I think
that it's unfair
to say -- to compare what the
reporter did
to anything that President Trump
has done.
But I think to say that words
don't have implications
when you're the president, you
know, that's
probably letting the president
off too easily.
And this rhetoric is intense.
It's not a trend.
We're not seeing, you know,
dozens of reporters
being beaten up.
And there may be more attention
to it than
there has been in the past.
But it is important to recognize
that the
democracy depends on reporters
asking people
in power questions, so that the
general public
has information.
We can't really self-govern
unless information
is widespread.
And, sometimes, reporters have
to be a little
aggressive.
I mean, you know, the reporter
didn't beat
up the politician.
The politician beat up the
reporter.
JOHN YANG: But, Howie, you were
saying that
some of these -- some of the
things are self-inflicted
by the press?
HOWARD KURTZ: You know, I have
never seen
the level of anger and
frustration and resentment
and even disgust among millions
of Americans
toward the media.
And I think there are a lot of
self-inflicted
wounds here, big mistakes that
are not learned
from, but also a lot of it the
byproduct of
a campaign in which the press
appeared to
be out of touch with the
frustration of the
many millions of Americans who
helped put
Donald Trump into the White
House and just
the way we botched it.
Everybody woke up on Election
Day and thought
Hillary Clinton was going to be
the next president.
And so it is one thing, of
course, for people
who don't like the media to vent
that on Twitter
or social media or even in
conversations.
And another thing -- and we have
to draw a
line between that and the kind
of physical
attacks that should never be
condoned by anybody.
And Republicans ought to speak
out against
what Gianforte did.
JOHN YANG: But talk about -- you
say that
there are mistakes that the
press hasn't learned
from.
What do you mean by that?
HOWARD KURTZ: Well, you can look
at everything
from the -- what turned out to
be the phony
and retracted allegations of
rape in the "Rolling
Stone" case.
There's been a lot of that.
And, also, there have been
stories in campaigns
where the press has just gone
too far, been
slow to retract, slow to
acknowledge mistakes.
I think all of that is a
problem.
And, by the way, while I
certainly don't defend
Donald Trump saying -- calling
journalists
the enemy of the American people
-- he says
that certain quote, fake news
organizations
-- this is not a one-way street.
There has been an incredible
level of vitriol
directed at the president,
mostly by commentators
and others, calling him names,
everything
from jokes on late-night
television, to just
political commentators calling
him a moron,
an idiot, a racist.
And a lot of people who at least
are favorably
disposed toward this president
resent that.
JOHN YANG: Tom, what do you --
answer, respond
to that.
TOM ROSENSTIEL: Trust in the
press has been
declining for a couple of
decades.
That's associated with actually
technology
expanding out.
It started in the '80s, when we
began to see
cable and our TV dial went from
four to 40
to now 400, and then talk radio,
with the
deregulation of the airwaves.
And you have these organizations
or you have
media outlets marketing
themselves as the
alternative to.
I don't think the rhetoric
toward President
Trump from media sources or
media commentators
is any worse than what Franklin
Roosevelt
got from a conservative press in
another era.
And Roosevelt was, you know, not
as blunt
as Trump about the press, but,
you know, there
was an ideological press back
then, when we
had multiple newspapers in town.
I would say, on balance,
frankly, the mainstream
press, which is decried often by
conservative
as liberal, is more professional
and more
accurate and faster to correct
mistakes than
probably it was in an earlier
era.
HOWARD KURTZ: But the mainstream
press...
TOM ROSENSTIEL: But there's a --
it's an economic
imperative, if you're
conservative media,
to ideologically tar the
mainstream press
as a way of getting audience.
So, this is a commercial
imperative for...
JOHN YANG: Very quickly, Howie.
We're almost out of time.
HOWARD KURTZ: OK.
People on the left, a lot of
people on the
left don't like the press
either.
It's not just a conservative vs.
liberal sort
of thing.
And, at the same time, I have
heard commentators
say that President Trump should
be removed
under the 25th Amendment.
Some of this is pretty harsh
stuff.
JOHN YANG: That's got to be the
last word.
Howie Kurtz, Tom Rosenstiel,
thanks for being
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are still
very few companies
run by women these days.
And, clearly, there are many
reasons for that,
including what many see as the
role of both
unconscious bias and outright
sexism.
Tonight, our economics
correspondent, Paul
Solman, explores another
potential connection:
whether there's a link between
risk-taking
in leadership, testosterone and
the perceptions
around gender.
It's part of his ongoing weekly
series, Making
Sense, which airs every
Thursday.
MAN: Welcome, everybody, to this
CNBC discussion
on the future of banking at the
World Economic
Forum.
PAUL SOLMAN: Financial CEOs at
Davos this
year.
ANDREW LIVERIS, CEO, Dow
Chemical: Good morning.
Mr. President.
Andrew Liveris, Dow Chemical.
PAUL SOLMAN: Manufacturing CEOs
at the White
House.
MARK FIELDS, CEO, Ford Motor
Company: CEO
of Ford.
DOUGLAS OBERHELMAN, CEO,
Caterpillar: Chairman
of Caterpillar.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Some of the great people in the
world of business.
PAUL SOLMAN: CEOs now being
mentioned as the
next president.
But, in 2017, the vast majority
of CEOs, 96
percent of the Fortune 500, are
still men.
JENNIFER LERNER, Harvard
University: I think
that this is socially
constructed.
The differences between males
and females
on a wide variety of things are
smaller than
the differences within males and
within females.
PAUL SOLMAN: Psychologist
Jennifer Lerner
studies gender and leadership at
Harvard.
We will hear more from her in a
bit.
But, first, let's check in with
economist
Andy Kim, who has made a career
out of studying
CEOs in intriguingly quirky
ways.
ANDY KIM, Finance Professor: So,
you're gripping
this horse, right?
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, the reins.
Now, a few of you might remember
Andy Kim
teaching me two years ago the
equestrian dance
move in the hyper-viral video
sensation "Gangnam
Style," part of his offbeat
research showing
that CEOs who become visible,
for whatever
reason, can see their stock
price rise irrationally.
Well, he presented his brand-new
research,
not yet published, at this
year's annual Economics
Convention.
His latest hypothesis is as
offbeat as ever.
ANDY KIM: There is a strong
linkage between
your facial masculinity and your
risk-taking
behavior.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kim is now
exploring a possible
link between CEO risk-taking and
the hormone
testosterone, which, starting
with mid-19th
century experiments on roosters,
has been
linked to male dominance and
aggression throughout
the animal kingdom.
But how do you measure
testosterone in CEOs
with little time and probably
even less inclination
to give Korean assistant finance
professors
blood or saliva samples?
One possible way, thought Kim,
would be to
study their facial bone
structure.
ANDY KIM: So, this is Mike
Tyson's face, obviously
a high-testosterone guy.
PAUL SOLMAN: And not just
because he was a
notoriously aggressive
heavyweight champion,
claims Kim, but because of the
ratio of his
facial width.
ANDY KIM: Measure the distance
between your
cheekbones, where your ears are
attached to
your skull.
PAUL SOLMAN: To his facial
height.
ANDY KIM: From the point where
your skull
is linked to your teeth to the
point between
your eyebrows.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's the ridge
here?
ANDY KIM: It goes together with
your eye hole
in your skull, right.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, the science
here is far
from settled, but facial
width-to-height ratio,
a skull measurement technique
developed by
archaeologists, has been
proposed as a proxy
for masculinity, on the theory
that it's influenced
by exposure to testosterone.
ANDY KIM: The idea is, more
masculine, wider
face.
PAUL SOLMAN: The typical ratio
in men, Kim
has found, 1.8.
And mine?
ANDY KIM: Yours was 1.83, which
is..
PAUL SOLMAN: Just average, and
exactly the
same as Justin Bieber's, by the
way.
Muy macho Mike Tyson, 2.28.
Not far behind, at 2.17, Jack
Ma.
According to Kim...
ANDY KIM: Very high-testosterone
CEO.
PAUL SOLMAN: And a very
successful one, as
founder of Alibaba, the Chinese
e-commerce
firm bigger than Amazon and eBay
combined.
Kim thinks a man's facial
width-to-height
ratio does correlate with
testosterone, but,
even if it doesn't, he has a
provocative finding:
that the average score for 1,162
CEOs, measured
by neutral third parties, was a
significantly
higher-than-average 2.0.
Even more striking, the wider
the face, the
higher the correlation with
risk-taking.
Your hypothesis was, the more
masculine, as
revealed by facial
width-to-height ratio,
the more testosterone and,
therefore, the
CEO is going to take more risks
how?
ANDY KIM: Borrowing more.
PAUL SOLMAN: Borrowing more
money.
ANDY KIM: Another part of it is
mergers and
acquisitions.
You want to have higher social
status.
You want to take over your
competitor and
become a bigger guy.
PAUL SOLMAN: And this turns out
to be true?
ANDY KIM: Yes, that's what we
find in our
paper.
Not only does the guy more
frequently merge,
but he spends more money on
acquisition every
year.
PAUL SOLMAN: And then there's
testosterone's
well-established connection to
vocal pitch,
at any given age, the lower the
pitch, the
higher the testosterone, a
relationship Andy
Kim has also begun to study.
ANDY KIM: We look at vocal
masculinity.
PAUL SOLMAN: Vocal?
ANDY KIM: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is a low
voice, as opposed
to a high voice?
ANDY KIM: Exactly.
The more masculine guys, they
tend to be borrowing
more.
All consistent.
JENNIFER LERNER: There's a
systematic relationship
there.
And it's all explained through
testosterone
as a kind of social dominance
hormone.
PAUL SOLMAN: Jennifer Lerner
doesn't study
facial width or vocal pitch.
Instead, she measures
testosterone levels
directly of leaders enrolled in
advanced programs
at the Kennedy School of
Government.
JENNIFER LERNER: We do it
through saliva,
and we have them drool, which
can be a little
bit amusing, because we have,
you know, three-star
admirals and...
PAUL SOLMAN: Drooling three-star
admirals.
(LAUGHTER)
JENNIFER LERNER: It turns out
that highly
successful people love to be
studied.
PAUL SOLMAN: And one study of 78
men published
last year seems to support the
first part
of Andy Kim's hypothesis, that
male leaders
have higher-than-average
testosterone.
When you take their
testosterone, does it
correlate with their rank?
JENNIFER LERNER: Yes, it does,
the more testosterone,
the more subordinates you have.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, this could
just be because
power begets testosterone,
rather than the
other way round.
But it fits with the current
view that testosterone
encourages status-seeking in
men.
How?
Mainly by decreasing fear and
triggering anger,
says Lerner, both of which
increase risk-taking.
JENNIFER LERNER: Fear and anger
have opposite
effects when it comes to risk.
We know that men are more likely
to experience
anger and to take more risks as
a result of
that anger.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, angry
investment managers,
angry CEOs do better?
JENNIFER LERNER: We human beings
are risk-averse
and just kind of, on average,
leave some money
on the table in investment
situations.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
JENNIFER LERNER: So, to the
extent that risk-taking
is going to lead to benefits...
PAUL SOLMAN: The
testosterone-enriched are
at an advantage.
JENNIFER LERNER: The male who is
angry is
going to really thrive in that
environment.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, if testosterone
can help
explain which men rise to the
top, does it
also explain why it's so often
men, instead
of women?
No, says Lerner.
JENNIFER LERNER: It's certainly
not inevitable,
because there are places where
you can see
progress in society, but it is
extremely rare.
And part of that is the gender
stereotypes
of what we hold in our minds.
An angry woman is called a
bitch.
An angry man is called powerful.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, it does sound
as if the deck
is stacked against women
ascending to the
top of organizations, no?
JENNIFER LERNER: It depends, I
think, on what
the patterns of ascension are
going to be.
To the extent that leadership
can arise through
building networks, through
building coalitions,
there's a path to the top.
PAUL SOLMAN: And maybe, in a
corporate age
of network- and
coalition-building, the
so-called
advantages of being seen as
masculine will
eventually fade.
After all, the chickens came
home to roost
after the financial crisis of
'08.
If and when there's another, you
have to wonder
if risk-happy fellows will still
rule the
roost.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
economics correspondent
Paul Solman reporting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series.
Tonight, we hear from Sebastian
Thrun.
He's an adjunct professor at
Stanford University
and the founder of Udacity, an
online educational
organization.
He founded Google X, the
semi-secret research
facility that began development
of Google's
self-driving car.
SEBASTIAN THRUN, Founder,
Udacity: Artificial
intelligence is to the human
brain what the
steam engine has been to the
human muscle.
Before the agricultural
revolution, most of
us were farmers, and our
distinguishing capabilities
were our physical strength and
agility.
And then we invented machines
that make us
stronger and, all of a sudden,
one farmer
can make food for 150 people.
And this has unleashed a flurry
of amazing
innovations, like airplanes,
cell phones,
jobs you never heard of like
software engineer
or TV anchor, all these
wonderful things.
That is about to change once
again.
I
think we're going to look back
and find that
driving a car is just like the
same way the
Middle Ages look from today's
perspective.
We kill over a million people
every year in
this world using traffic
accidents.
And that's an intolerably high
number.
We text, we make phone calls,
we're fatigued,
we're sometimes even drunk when
driving and
all this stuff.
A self-driving car doesn't text,
it doesn't
fatigue, it looks in all
directions, it's
never drunk, and it emerges as a
safe alternative
to human driving.
I have a 9-year-old.
I would love to put him in a
driverless car
and say, go to school on your
own.
And he would love it, because it
would give
him the ability to go around and
organize
his own play dates.
I think every technology comes
with its risks
and with its possibility for
abuse.
I mean, you can take a kitchen
knife, and
you can cut your food, or you
can kill somebody
or hurt somebody with the same
knife.
And the same is true for every
technology
we invent.
So, I think what's important is
that we approach
these technologies with
responsibility.
The next generation of
technology is going
to be called artificial
intelligence.
And we're going to have an I.Q.
of 10,000.
We're going to be able to solve
every problem
and know everything there is to
know just
by using A.I.
My students and I recently did
work on artificial
intelligence for detecting skin
cancer, and
we found that if we train an
artificial intelligence
with about 130,000 images, we
can find skin
cancer basically using an iPhone
as accurately
as the best board-certified
dermatologist.
And that's sensational, because
now we can
take the skill of a Stanford
doctor and bring
that skill to the entire world
by a platform
that everybody already has,
which is a smartphone.
Every time I talk through my
phone -- and
it's probably about an hour a
day -- it could
analyze my speech and thereby
find things
like Alzheimer's much, much,
much earlier
than we find it today.
And that's exciting, because it
would mean
we would be able to cure and
treat those diseases
at a stage when they're often
still curable.
I can tell you, when I started
working on
self-driving cars more than 10
years ago,
most of my professor colleagues
told me it's
impossible and I'm wasting my
time and possibly
my career.
When you look at the Wright
brothers, 100
years ago, the world's experts
had come together
and concluded that it's
impossible, there
will not be such a thing as
flight.
So, when you go forward, why
can't we cure
all of cancer?
Why can't we cure heart failure
and heart
diseases?
And why can't cars fly in the
future?
Why do they have to be on the
ground?
I mean, all these things, when
you think through
it, the answer might be very
different from
what the past tells us.
My name is Sebastian Thrun, and
this is my
Brief, But hopefully Spectacular
take on imaging
the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sebastian Thrun.
And a quick news update before
we go tonight.
Both NBC News and The Washington
Post are
reporting that the president's
son-in-law
Jared Kushner has come under
scrutiny by the
FBI in its investigation into
Russian meddling
into the election.
Investigators believe that
Kushner, one of
the president's top advisers,
has significant
information related to their
probe.
Kushner has not been accused of
any wrongdoing.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, my interview with Aya
Hijazi on
her imprisonment in Egypt, and a
review of
President Trump's overseas trip
with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.